[DO NOT MERGE] Pseudo PR for first release (#54)
caravagnalab/nf-evoverse: docs/output.md

- [Variant Annotation](#variant-annotation)
- [Formatter](#formatter)
- [Lifter](#lifter)
- [Catalogue Driver Annotation](#catalogue-driver-annotation)
- [QC](#qc)
- [Subclonal Deconvolution](#subclonal-deconvolution)
- [Signature Deconvolution](#signature-deconvolution)

## Directory Structure

The default directory structure is as follows:

```
{outdir}
├── bcftools
|   └── filter
│       └── <sample>
├── variant_annotation
|   └── vep
│       └── <sample>
├── driver_annotation
|   └── annotate_driver
│       └── <sample>
├── pipeline_info
├── formatter
│   ├── cna2cnaqc
│       └── <sample>
│   ├── cnaqc2tsv
│       └── <patient>
|   └── vcf2cnaqc
│       └── <sample>
├── lifter
│   ├── mpileup
│       └── <patient>
│   └── positions
│       └── <sample>
├── qc
│   ├── tinc
│       └── <sample>
│   ├── cnaqc
│       └── <sample>
│   └── join_cnaqc
│       └── <patient>
├── signature_deconvolution
|   ├── sigprofiler
│       └── <dataset>
|   └── sparsesignatures
│       └── <dataset>
└── subclonal_deconvolution
|   ├── mobster
│       └── <sample>
|   ├── viber
│       └── <patient>
|   └── pyclonevi
│       └── <patient>
|   ├── ctree

> │       └── <patient>,<sample>

Author: ```suggestion
    ├── mobster
    |   └── <sample>
    ├── viber
    |   └── <patient>
    ├── pyclonevi
    |   └── <patient>
    └── ctree
        └── <patient>,<sample>
```

Author: the others are also similarly broken, but that's just nit-picking, no need to change if you don't care. :slightly_smiling_face:

work/
.nextflow.log
```

## Variant Annotation

This directory contains results from the variant annotation subworkflow. At the level of individual samples, genomic variants present in the input VCF files are annotated using VEP.

### VEP

[VEP (Variant Effect Predictor)](https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html) is a `Ensembl` tool that determines the effect of all variants (SNPs, insertions, deletions, CNVs or structural variants) on genes, transcripts, and protein sequence.
This step starts from VCF files.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/variant_annotation/vep/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>.annotated.vep.vcf.gz` and `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>.annotated.vep.vcf.gz.tbi`
  - VCF file and tabix index with called mutations

</details>

## Formatter

> The Formatter subworkflow is used to convert file to other formats and to standardize the output files resulting from different mutation (Mutect2, Strelka, Platypus) and cna callers (ASCAT, Sequenza, Battenberg).

Author: ```suggestion
The Formatter subworkflow is used to convert files to other formats and to standardize the output files resulting from different mutation (Mutect2, Strelka, Platypus) and cna callers (ASCAT, Sequenza, Battenberg).
```

### vcf2cnaqc

This parser is designed to process VCF files generated by various variant calling tools and to convert them into a unified RDS file format.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/formatter/vcf2cnaqc/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_snv.rds`
  - RDS file containing parsed VCF in table format

</details>

### cna2cnaqc

This parser is designed to standardize copy number calls and purity estimates from various callers into a unified format.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/formatter/cna2cnaqc/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_cna.rds`
  - RDS file containing parsed segments and purity estimate output in table format

</details>

### cnaqc2tsv

> This parser is designed to convert mutations data of joint CNAqc analysis from CNAqc format (RDS file) into a tabular format (TSV file). This step is mandatory for running python-based tools (e.g. PyClone-VI, SigProfiler) and it is mandatory if `--tools` contains either `pyclone-vi` or `sigprofiler`.

Author: ```suggestion
This parser is designed to convert mutations data of joint CNAqc analysis from CNAqc format (RDS file) into a tabular format (TSV file). This step is always run for python-based tools (e.g. PyClone-VI, SigProfiler) and it is mandatory if `--tools` contains either `pyclone-vi` or `sigprofiler`.
```

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all patients</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/formatter/cnaqc2tsv/<dataset>/<patient>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_joint_table.tsv`

>   - TSV file containing mutations mapped to corrsponding copy number segments.

Author: ```suggestion
  - TSV file containing mutations mapped to corresponding copy number segments.
```

</details>

## Lifter

> The Lifter subworkflow is an optional step, and it is run when, despite having multiple samples per patient, variant calling is performed separately on each sample. In this case, instead of a VCF file with a column per sample (multi-sample variant calling), a single VCF file is provided per sample. When multiple samples from the same patient are provided, the user can specify either a single joint VCF file, containing variant calls from all tumor samples of the patient (see [joint variant calling](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.4.2/parameters/#joint_mutect2)), or individual sample specific VCF files. In the latter case, path to tumor BAM files must be provided in order to collect all mutations from the samples and perform pile-up of sample's private mutations in all the other samples. Two intermediate steps, [get_positions](#get_positions) and [mpileup](#mpileup), are performed to identify private mutations in all the samples and retrieve their variant allele frequency. Once private mutations are properly defined, they are merged back into the original VCF file during the join_positions step. The updated VCF file is then converted into a RDS object.

Author: ```suggestion
The Lifter subworkflow is an optional step, and it is run when, despite having multiple samples per patient, variant calling is performed separately on each sample. 
In this case, instead of a VCF file with a column per sample (multi-sample variant calling), a single VCF file is provided per sample. 
When multiple samples from the same patient are provided, the user can specify either a single joint VCF file, containing variant calls from all tumor samples of the patient (see [joint variant calling](https://nf-co.re/sarek/3.4.2/parameters/#joint_mutect2)), or individual sample specific VCF files. 
In the latter case, path to tumor BAM files must be provided in order to collect all mutations from the samples and perform pile-up of sample's private mutations in all the other samples. 

Two intermediate steps, [mpileup](#mpileup) and [get_positions](#get_positions), are performed to identify private mutations in all the samples and retrieve their variant allele frequency. 
Once private mutations are properly defined, they are merged back into the original VCF file during the join_positions step. 
The updated VCF file is then converted into a RDS object.
```

Author: is the link to sarek correct? don't find really information about joint variant calling there.

Reviewer: I was referencing a parameter that can be set inside sarek, but I rewrote the sentence in a different way

> The results of Lifter subworkflow step are collected in `{outdir}/lifter/` directory.

Author: ```suggestion

The results of Lifter subworkflow step are collected in `{outdir}/lifter/` directory.
```

**Output directory: `{outdir}/lifter/positions/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>.positions_missing`
  - TXT file containing mutations to be retrieved for a given sample
- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_pileup_VCF.rds`
  - RDS containing retrieved mutations from pileup

</details>

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all patients</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/lifter/positions/<dataset>/<patient>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_all_positions.rds`
  - RDS containing shared and private mutations of all samples

</details>

## Catalogue Driver Annotation

This directory contains results from the driver annotation subworkflow.

### Tumour-type driver annotation

According to the specified tumour type, potential driver mutations are identified and annotated using [IntOGen database](https://www.intogen.org/search). The user can also provide a custom table of driver genes.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/driver_annotation/annotate_driver/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_driver.rds`
  - RDS with annotated mutations

</details>

## QC

> The QC subworkflows requires in input a segmentation file from allele-specific copy number callers (either [Sequenza](https://sequenzatools.bitbucket.io/#/home), [ASCAT](https://github.com/VanLoo-lab/ascat) and [Battenberg](https://github.com/Wedge-lab/battenberg)) and the joint VCF file. As a first step, the QC subworkflow provides an estimate of normal and tumour samples contamination in [TINC](#tinc) step, in order to have a measure of experimental quality. Then,it first conducts a quality control on copy number and somatic mutation data for individual samples in [CNAqc](#cnaqc) step, and subsequently summarize validated information at patient level in [join_CNAqc](#join_cnaqc) step.

Author: ```suggestion
The QC subworkflows requires in input a segmentation file from allele-specific copy number callers (either [Sequenza](https://sequenzatools.bitbucket.io/#/home), [ASCAT](https://github.com/VanLoo-lab/ascat) and [Battenberg](https://github.com/Wedge-lab/battenberg)) and the joint VCF file. 
As a first step, the QC subworkflow provides an estimate of normal and tumour sample contamination in the [TINC](#tinc) step, in order to have a measure of experimental quality. 
Then, it first conducts a quality control on copy number and somatic mutation data for individual samples in the [CNAqc](#cnaqc) step, and subsequently summarizes validated information at patient level in [join_CNAqc](#join_cnaqc) step.
```

> The QC subworkflow is a crucial step of the pipeline as it ensures high confidence in identifying clonal and subclonal events while accounting for variations in tumor purity.

Author: ```suggestion

The QC subworkflow is a crucial step of the pipeline as it ensures high confidence in identifying clonal and subclonal events while accounting for variations in tumor purity.
```

> The results of QC subworkflow step are collected in `{outdir}/qc/` directory.

Author: ```suggestion

The results of QC subworkflow step are collected in `{outdir}/qc/` directory.
```

### TINC

> [TINC](https://caravagnalab.github.io/TINC/index.html) is a package to calculate the contamination of tumor DNA in a matched normal sample. TINC provides a methods to determine, for every matched pair of normal and tumour sample biopsies, the proportion of cancer cells, or tumour read fractions, contaminating the normal sample (Tumour in Normal, TIN). Similarly, it determines the proportion of cancer cells in the tumour sample (Tumour in Tumour, TIT), also called tumour purity.

Author: ```suggestion
[TINC](https://caravagnalab.github.io/TINC/index.html) is a package to calculate the contamination of tumor DNA in a matched normal sample. 
TINC provides methods to determine, for every matched pair of normal and tumour sample biopsies, the proportion of cancer cells, or tumour read fractions, contaminating the normal sample (Tumour in Normal, TIN). Similarly, it determines the proportion of cancer cells in the tumour sample (Tumour in Tumour, TIT), also called tumour purity.
```

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/QC/tinc/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_fit.rds`
  - TINC fit containing TIN and TIT estimates in RDS;
- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_plot.rds` and `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_plot.pdf`:

>   - TINC report contianign TIN and TIT plots in PDF and RDS;

Author: ```suggestion
  - TINC report contianing TIN and TIT plots in PDF and RDS;
```

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_qc.csv`:
  - TINC summary report on normal contamination.

</details>

### CNAqc

[CNAqc](https://caravagnalab.github.io/CNAqc/) is a package that performs quality control of bulk cancer sequencing data for validating copy number segmentations against variant allele frequencies of somatic mutations.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/QC/CNAqc/<dataset>/<patient>/<sample>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_data_plot.rds` and `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_data.pdf`
  - CNAqc report with genome wide mutation and allele specific copy number plots in RDS and PDF
- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_qc_plot.rds` and `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_qc.pdf`
  - QC step report resulting from peak analysis in RDS and PDF
- `<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>_qc.rds`
  - CNAqc RDS object

</details>

### join_CNAqc

> This module creates a multi-CNAqc object for patient by summarizing the quality check performed at the single sample level. For more information about the structure of multi-CNAqc object see [CNAqc documentation](https://caravagnalab.github.io/CNAqc/articles/b10_MultiCNAqc.html).

Author: ```suggestion
This module creates a multi-CNAqc object for each patient by summarizing the quality check performed at the single sample level. For more information about the structure of multi-CNAqc object see the [CNAqc documentation](https://caravagnalab.github.io/CNAqc/articles/b10_MultiCNAqc.html).
```

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all patients</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/QC/join_CNAqc/<dataset>/<patient>/`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_multi_cnaqc.rds`
  - mCNAqc RDS object

</details>

## Subclonal Deconvolution

> The subclonal deconvolution subworkflow requires in input a joint `mCNAqc` object resulting from the [join_CNAqc](#join_cnaqc) step. The subworkflow will perform multi-sample deconvolution if more than one sample for each patient is present.

Author: ```suggestion
The subclonal deconvolution subworkflow requires a joint `mCNAqc` object resulting from the [join_CNAqc](#join_cnaqc) step as input. The subworkflow will perform multi-sample deconvolution if more than one sample for each patient is present.
```

> The results of subclonal deconvolution step are collected in `{outdir}/subclonal_deconvolution/` directory.

Author: ```suggestion

The results of subclonal deconvolution step are collected in `{outdir}/subclonal_deconvolution/` directory.
```

  - TSV file for the best fit
- `<dataset>_<patient>_cluster_table.csv`
  - CSV file with clone assignment

</details>

### VIBER

[VIBER](https://caravagnalab.github.io/VIBER/index.html) is an R package that implements a variational Bayesian model to fit multi-variate Binomial mixtures. In the context of subclonal deconvolution VIBER models read counts that are associated with the most represented karyotype. It works for patients with both single and multiple samples.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/subclonal_deconvolution/viber/<dataset>/<patient>`**

- `<dataset>_<patient>_viber_best_fit.rds`
  - RDS file for best standard fit
- `<dataset>_<patient>_viber_best_heuristic_fit.rds`
  - RDS file for best standard fit with applied heuristic
- `<dataset>_<patient>_viber_best_fit_plots.rds`
  - RDS file containing summary plots for best standard fit
- `<dataset>_<patient>_viber_best_heuristic_fit_plots.rds`
  - RDS file containing summary plots for best standard fit with applied heuristic
- `<dataset>_<patient>_viber_report.{rds,pdf,png}`
  - report of VIBER deconvolution in RDS, PDF and PNG

</details>

### ctree

> Subclonal deconvolution results are used to build clone tree from both single samples and multple samples using [ctree](https://caravagnalab.github.io/ctree/index.html). ctree is a R-based package which implements basic functions to create, manipulate and visualize clone trees by modelling Cancer Cell Fractions (CCF) clusters. Annotated driver genes must be provided in the input data.

Author: ```suggestion
Subclonal deconvolution results are used to build clone trees from both single samples and multple samples using [ctree](https://caravagnalab.github.io/ctree/index.html). ctree is a R-based package which implements basic functions to create, manipulate and visualize clone trees by modelling Cancer Cell Fractions (CCF) clusters. Annotated driver genes must be provided in the input data.
```

> > **NB:** When `--tools pyclone-vi` is used, the output of PyClone-VI subclonal deconvolution is preprocessed prior to clone tree inference. Since ctree requires labeling one of the clusters as "clonal," the one with the highest CCF across all samples is choosen.

Author: ```suggestion
:::note
When `--tools pyclone-vi` is used, the output of PyClone-VI subclonal deconvolution is preprocessed prior to clone tree inference. Since ctree requires labeling one of the clusters as "clonal," the one with the highest CCF across all samples is chosen.
:::
```

https://nf-co.re/docs/contributing/website/markdown

VIBER and MOBSTER fits are already compatible for ctree analysis.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/subclonal_deconvolution/ctree/<dataset>/{<patient>,<patient>/<sample>/}`**

- `{<dataset>_<patient>,<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>}_ctree_<tool>.rds`
  - RDS file containing inferred clone tree
- `{<dataset>_<patient>,<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>}_ctree_<tool>_plots.rds`
  - RDS file for clone tree plot
- `{<dataset>_<patient>,<dataset>_<patient>_<sample>}_ctree_<tool>_report.{rds,png,pdf}`

>   - ctree report in RDS,PNG and PDF

Author: ```suggestion
  - ctree report as RDS, PNG and PDF
```

</details>

## Signature Deconvolution

> Mutational signatures are distinctive patterns of somatic mutations in cancer genomes that reveal the underlying mutational processes driving tumor evolution and progression. These signatures are identified by analyzing aggregated point-mutation counts from multiple samples. Validated mutations from the [join_CNAqc](#join_cnaqc) step are converted into a joint TSV table (see [cnaqc2tsv](#cnaqc2tsv)) and then input into the signature deconvolution subworkflow, which performs _de novo_ extraction, inference, interpretation, or deconvolution of mutational counts.

Author: ```suggestion
Mutational signatures are distinctive patterns of somatic mutations in cancer genomes that reveal the underlying mutational processes driving tumor evolution and progression. 
These signatures are identified by analyzing aggregated point-mutation counts from multiple samples. 

Validated mutations from the [join_CNAqc](#join_cnaqc) step are converted into a joint TSV table (see [cnaqc2tsv](#cnaqc2tsv)) and then input into the signature deconvolution subworkflow, which performs _de novo_ extraction, inference, interpretation, or deconvolution of mutational counts.
```

The results of this step are collected in `{pubslish_dir}/signature_deconvolution/`. Two tools can be specified by using `--tools` parameter: [SparseSignatures](#sparsesignatures) and [SigProfiler](#sigprofiler).

### SparseSignatures

[SparseSignatures](https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SparseSignatures.html) is an R-based computational framework that provides a set of functions to extract and visualize the mutational signatures that best explain the mutation counts of a large number of patients.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for dataset</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/signatures_deconvolution/sparsesignature/<dataset>/`**

- `<dataset>_mut_counts.rds`
  - RDS of trinucleotide mutation counts of original data
- `<dataset>_best_params_config.rds`

>   - signatures best configiration object

Author: ```suggestion
  - signatures best configuration object
```

- `<dataset>_cv_means_mse.rds`
  - cross validation output RDS
- `<dataset>_nmf_Lasso_out.rds`
  - NMF Lasso output RDS
- `<dataset>_plot_all.pdf` and `<dataset>_plot_all.rds`
  - exposure plot in PDF and RDS

</details>

### SigProfiler

[SigProfiler](https://osf.io/t6j7u/wiki/home/) is a python framework that allows _de novo_ extraction of mutational signatures from data generated in a matrix format. The tool identifies the number of operative mutational signatures, their activities in each sample, and the probability for each signature to cause a specific mutation type in a cancer sample. The tool makes use of `SigProfilerMatrixGenerator` and `SigProfilerExtractor`, seamlessly integrating with other `SigProfiler` tools.

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files for all samples</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/signatures_deconvolution/sigprofiler/<dataset>/results`**

- `input/`
  - folder containing a copy of the user-provided input files for SigProfilerMatrixGenerator step
- `input_data.txt`

>   - join table of all mutations in the dataset in TXT

Author: ```suggestion
  - joint table of all mutations in the dataset in TXT
```

- `output/`

>   - folder containing the DBS, SBS, INDEL nucleotide matrices resulting from SigProfilerMatrixGenerator step

Author: ```suggestion
  - folder containing the DBS, SBS, INDEL nucleotide matrices resulting from the SigProfilerMatrixGenerator step
```

- `{SBS96,DBS78,ID83}/`

>   - folder containing the results of SigProfilerExtractor step in the SBS, DBS and ID mutational contexts. This directory will contain:

Author: ```suggestion
  - folder containing the results of the SigProfilerExtractor step in the SBS, DBS and ID mutational contexts. This directory will contain:
```

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.

## Reference files

> Different tools of the pipeline generate references files. Once reference file for VEP and SigProfiler are not provided they are stored in the tool-specific folder.

Author: ```suggestion
Different tools of the pipeline generate references files. If reference files for VEP and SigProfiler are not provided, they are then stored in the tool-specific folder.
```

### VEP

When VEP cache is not specified, the desired VEP cache is downladed in `{outdir}/references/VEP/vep_cache/homo_sapiens/{VEP_version}_{ref_genome}`.

### SigProfiler

> Reference genome for SigProfiler is store in the following folder:

Author: ```suggestion
Reference genome for SigProfiler is stored in the following folder:
```

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

**Output directory: `{outdir}/subclonal_deconvolution/signature_deconvolution/SigProfiler/genome/tsb/{ref_genome}`**

- `{chromosome}.txt`
  - genome assemby chromosme level
- `{ref_genome}_proportions.txt`

>   - genome assemby proportions

Author: ```suggestion
  - genome assembly chromosme level
- `{ref_genome}_proportions.txt`
  - genome assembly proportions
```
